Raki or Ratchi I must have led a sheltered life as I have
not heard of or encountered Raki or in local village speak Ratchi until we first came to
the island. It's a clear, strong spirit manufactured from grape pressings or so I've been told
and it appears that licensing regulations are more relaxed than it's made as a sort
of home brew. It's traditional for a small flask and glasses to be brought to your table
at the end of a meal, sometimes with a complimentary sweet course. I'm pleased if it's a plate
of fresh fruit as grapes, apple slices or melon pieces dipped in the spirit is my preferred
way to consume it. There are other traditions that seem to be associated with it. Men will
often throw it down like a shot and then slam the empty glass on the table where it's refilled.
We also suffered one evening in one of the family restaurants where after already relaxing
from a hearty meal with plentiful wine we were brought a small flask and drank it slowly
while listening to the owner's son playing me traditional music on a liner. When the
performance had finished we clapped to Ioko enthusiastically as it was clear that he had
musical skills. He came over to our table with another flask and explained this as from
his father, the owner of the restaurant. He pointed at a bearded gentleman closer to
our age sitting in the corner and we both raised glasses to one another. We drank two
small glasses each of the strong spirit emptying the flask but to our alarm Ioko brought another
full flask. We didn't know whether to refuse as bad etiquette so we compromised by ordering
a flask for Ioko and his father and drank just half of our flask before insisting on
getting the bill and paying it while I could still see and stand up. In future I vowed
to always leave a little in the flask to demonstrate clearly that we'd finished for the night.
On other occasions, particularly if it's a lunchtime meal, on leaving you may be handed
a small recycled water bottle with a hushed description, this is my raki, the best. I
carry a recurrent dread of leaving one of these in the hire car like a lurking unexploded
bomb, either waiting to spontaneously combust in the heat or almost as bad being mistaken
for a refreshing drink of water, a large swig of which would probably immediately exceed
the breathalyzer allowance. Thankfully neither of these have yet occurred, though I do speculate
how debilitating a new arrival at night at the airport would find their first drive on
the always exciting Cretan National Road if it was unwittingly enlivened by a hearty swig
from a forgotten raki bottle found in the hire car.
The discovery of the raki industry on the island cleared up another mystery when we
spotted what looked like Anthony Gormley's foray into recreating the Clangers. Fans
of 1970s TV will recognise the likeness. They looked ancient and apparently they were distillation
vessels for creating the spirit, but I quite like them as a sort of metallic homage to
the Clangers. The abundance of the free raki bottles and the occasional house warming gift
of a bottle, again the promise this is my own or my uncle's, my brother's, father's
raki, the best, meant some kind of plan of action was required. We'd heard it was recommended
for aching joints and muscles, but currently not suffering from those problems and also
not wanting to go about in the daytime smelling of spirits for obvious reasons. The smell
in a hot car could also be dangerous. A cafe owner in the town recommended soaking fruit
in a bottle with a little sugar and turning it daily for a couple of weeks before straining
off the fruit. This process seems similar to making slow gin, so it certainly sounded
an option and we may end up with a more palatable drink. We experimented with lemon, strawberries
and cherries, but balked at the suggestion of coffee to provide a Cretan Tia Maria drink.
It was a success and proved to be a welcome gift in small bottles to give to friends,
so the surplus problem was solved.
Archaeology For some visitors to Crete, the wealth of
archaeological sites on the island is a major attraction. I'd always been impressed by
the abundance of the sites, but also by their similarity to modern day hill villages. This
is not true with the royal palaces like Knossos and Malia, both of which we've visited and
vowed to return at a quieter time to try and avoid the crowds.
The sites that I found more interesting were the Minoan towns like Gurnia to the south
of us, set in an idyllic position near the coast and covering a relatively large area
of hillside, sloping down towards the sea. Walking around the site, the width of the
streets and the footprints of the small houses and the rooms within were so close in scale
that they were a bit of a different layout to our own and many other traditional villages on the island.
We can imagine our own village would look very similar if all the houses were demolished
to leave the walls only one metre high, and the remaining walls in this ancient town appeared
of very similar construction to what we have seen of our own stone walls during the renovation
process.
Archaeologists have dated the settlements back to 3000 years BC, but have since concluded
that part of the original town was levelled around 1700 BC for the construction of a small
palace. At its most populous, the town was estimated to have a population of some 4000,
but excavations suggest the palace was destroyed by fire around 1450 BC, at a time when every
major Minoan centre was destroyed or abandoned.
The town was excavated in the early 20th century and is one of the Minoan settlements to be
fully excavated. The town lies on a small hill a few hundred metres from the coast and
in the Gulf of Marabella. The location is an important one, lying on the logical east-west
route across the island, but also near the north-south route at the narrowest point of
the island. The routes avoid the mountain heights, allowing easier communications. The
town was thought to extend down towards the seashore, and evidence of seashore installations
with excavations by archaeologists, naming a shore house, thought to be a ship shed,
used as a long and narrow form of boat house. It was a large building, estimated at least
25 by 10 metres, incorporating storage rooms as well as ship stores. There are also remains
of a pier-type promontory foundations, both above water level and extending below the
water. These are fascinating remains and the Guernier site is heartily recommended for
a visit, but for us the most interesting detail is in the writings about the site and the
reference to Minoan houses. A quote from this, An idea of what Minoan houses looked
like can be gained from the ivory plaques discovered in the east wing of Knossos. These
plaques show what houses in the town of Knossos looked like in the seventeenth century B.C.
On the roof there was a small room. This may have been used for sleeping in during the
hot summer months. The rooms on the first floor had windows, but those on the ground
floor did not, although some of them had doors on the ground floor. It may be that
the windows on the ground floor were avoided for simple reasons of security. The houses
were built around a wooden frame, wooden beams running horizontally and were linked to upright
beams. The most likely reason for the use of these beams was as protection against earthquake
damage. I was astounded reading this, as the description so closely matched our own house
before the renovation. The ground floor lacked a window, these on the first floor, and the
constructions were reinforced with timbers. As part of the rebuilding works, these were
replaced with steel frame construction as earthquake protection. There was also mention
of access between the floors by wooden ladders through a trap door inside the house. Shown
below is the hatch and ladder staircase when we first saw the house. One thing that has
always fascinated me about the island was the abundance of stones. Where in Britain
fields should be subdivided by hedgerows, here there were miles and miles of dry stone
walls. The stones were often used for elaborate terracing following the steep contours of
the mountains, but the surprising thing was that the fields and landscapes were still
covered in large stones. The rural depopulation and abandonment was not enough to explain
the quantity. It seemed as if despite all the traditional houses, the original paved
tracks and the boundary walls using these stones, there was still just too many to allow
the clearance of the land. To me it was a mystery.
Tree in Daphilos One of my favourite restaurants in our early
stays was in the next village where you ate out of doors under the stars with a menu that
was all mezzas and predominantly vegetable dishes. They were always delicious and reasonably
priced and accompanied by metal flasks of the local house wine, nicely chilled. One
of the best things about the place was the waiter who was always welcoming but with a
very dry sense of humour. When it wasn't busy we would pester him with questions, most
of which he would answer with a shrug and a, I don't know, why do you want to know
that? He mostly reserved factual replies for questions about the food or recipes and
in these areas he was helpful. I recall that he was one of the first people to tell us
the name of the place across the large bay that we had discovered was Thripty but when
asked what it would be like he retorted, cold I should think, like this wine. One surprise
was when we asked his name and although he warned us it was unusual, we were amazed to
be told it was Triandaphalos which translates as rose or literally thirty petals. We were
disappointed one year to find the restaurant all closed up or the furniture was neatly
stacked on the terrace part which was covered with a rustic sort of wooden veranda. On later
visits we discovered that it had reopened but the new proprietor lamented that trade
was very slow as people seemed to have forgotten about it and in truth it was a little way
out of town, an upper hill that might deter casual visits. Anyway we stayed and had a
meal that was as good as it had always been, fava, several different bean dishes, courgette
balls, grilled aubergines, spicy cheese dips, meatballs and peppers accompanied by home-baked
bread and local wine. When we finished the owner shared a flask of raggi with us and
on here in our house was in the upper village, offered us a lift home which was tempting
but we politely refused saying that the walk up would help us sleep but we promised a return.
The food was so good that we returned the following week bringing two friends who had
a shop in the resort. They enjoyed the meal but again we were the only diners. It was
in the early days of social media and I suggested they try to promote the business on TripAdvisor
which I wasn't sure that he saw the point of and our friends also promised to promote
the business to customers of their shop in the town. I thought no more about it but I
was pleased to see the following spring that as we walked past one evening the restaurant
seemed full, so full that we walked by suggesting we went on to somewhere quieter but the owner
had other plans calling out to us, hey Jeff come in I want to thank you so much. After
your visit last year your friends kept sending us new customers and we have a good TripAdvisor
score and things are going so well. I want to thank you for your help you must eat here
on the house. We were ushered in and treated like honoured guests. We had to go into the
kitchen where his wife who was the chef would also thank us and a space was cleared out
front for a table for us and we had a lovely meal for free. Maybe what goes around comes
around as they say. Wine. Crete has vineyards and produces some very good wine that is
rarely seen in Britain. We'd seen vineyards on some of the plateaus and had noticed the
vines tended to be low growing and wired differently to farming methods noticed in Italy or Spain.
Our reaching out is frequent enough that we control our budget by sticking to the local
wines served in half or one kilo metal jugs and this white wine is usually served chilled
and tends to be light and refreshing. When a new taverna opened in our village our first
meal there was accompanied by the local wine and as sometimes happens a free drink is provided
at the end of the meal. As we paid our bill a large jug of wine was brought to our table.
Not wishing to offend we explained we'd only arrived that afternoon and had some unpacking
and sorting out to do at the house. Where is your house? I pointed out through the side
window and said it's just at the back there. We're neighbours. Oh well take the jug home
with you it will help you with your unpacking. You can bring it back tomorrow. If we're not
open just leave it at the door. On returning the jug the next day to make conversation
I said how much we'd enjoyed the meal and the wine. The wine can be bought in town.
You can keep the box in your fridge much cheaper than buying bottles. Always having
an eye for a bargain and knowing that jugs in the taverna were priced at only three or
six euros I enquired where I would find the boxes for sale. Do you know Andreas at the
bottom of the hill going into town? Isn't that the butcher's I asked curiously? Yes
he's my friend. Tell him Yanni sent you. He will give you my price if you're lucky.
So later that week I was parking nearby and entering the first butcher's shop I tried
to buy drinks in. Hello we had your wine at Yanni's Taverna. He said I could buy it here.
Of course white or red my friend? White please the same as Yanni has. 25 litres is that your
car nearby it's quite heavy. I roughly calculated this would be over five gallons and would
weigh around 50 pounds but also would completely fill the fridge and outlast our three week
stay by some margin. That's probably more than I want. Is that the only size you have?
Oh no 20 litres or 15. Anything smaller I asked tentatively? 10 litres then almost dismissively.
We also have the smaller five litres. I think that would probably suit us to start with
and one was produced from behind the counter. Nine euros pardon? Nine of course I thanked him
paid and stacked out to the butchers with the smallest wine box he had for sale and the largest
one I'd ever bought while wondering how much the price per litre fairly have bought in bulk say
25 litres bulk also working out the profit margin in Tavernas on their wine jug sales. Still I repeat
I love a bargain.